Katib v1beta1 documentation update (#2312)
kubeflow/website: content/en/docs/components/katib/experiment.md

+++

> This page describes in detail how to configure and run a Katib experiment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide describes how to configure and run a Katib experiment.
```

The experiment can perform hyperparameter tuning or a neural architecture search
(NAS) (**alpha**), depending on the configuration settings.

For an overview of the concepts involved, read the [introduction to
Katib](/docs/components/katib/overview/).

<a id="docker-image"></a>

## Packaging your training code in a container image

Katib and Kubeflow are Kubernetes-based systems. To use Katib, you must package
your training code in a Docker container image and make the image available
in a registry. See the [Docker
documentation](https://docs.docker.com/develop/develop-images/baseimages/) and
the [Kubernetes
documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/containers/images/).

## Configuring the experiment

To create a hyperparameter tuning or NAS experiment in Katib, you define the
experiment in a YAML configuration file. The YAML file defines the range of
potential values (the search space) for the parameters that you want to
optimize, the objective metric to use when determining optimal values, the
search algorithm to use during optimization, and other configurations.

> See the [YAML file for the random algorithm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a reference, you can use the YAML file of the [random algorithm
```

These are the fields in the experiment configuration spec:

- **parameters**: The range of the hyperparameters or other parameters that you

>   want to tune for your ML model. The parameters define the _search space_,

Reviewer: Please double check that "ML" has been predefined in this doc (it's a small thing and we know it's "machine learning" (what else!) but this makes the guide more "proper" :))

Author: Sure, I explain abbreviation.

  For example, you may provide a minimum and maximum value or a list
  of allowed values for each hyperparameter.
  Katib generates hyperparameter combinations in the range based on the
  hyperparameter tuning algorithm that you specify. See the [`ParameterSpec`
  type](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/blob/master/pkg/apis/controller/experiments/v1beta1/experiment_types.go#L177-L198).

- **objective**: The metric that you want to optimize.
  The objective metric is also called the _target variable_.
  A common metric is the model's accuracy in the validation pass of the training
  job (_validation-accuracy_). You also specify whether you want Katib to
  maximize or minimize the metric.

  Katib uses the `objectiveMetricName` and `additionalMetricNames` to monitor
  how the hyperparameters work with the model.
  Katib records the value of the best `objectiveMetricName` metric (maximized
  or minimized based on `type`) and the corresponding hyperparameter set
  in Experiment's `.status.currentOptimalTrial.parameterAssignments`.
  If the `objectiveMetricName` metric for a set of hyperparameters reaches the `goal`,
  Katib stops trying more hyperparameter combinations.

>   You can run experiment without specifying the `goal`. In that case, Katib

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  You can run the experiment without specifying the `goal`. In that case, Katib
```

"the" or "your"

>   runs experiment until corresponding succeeded trials reaches `maxTrialCount`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  runs the experiment until corresponding succeeded trials reach `maxTrialCount`.
```

"trials" (plural) "reach"

  `maxTrialCount` parameter is described bellow.

  See the [`ObjectiveSpec`
  type](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/blob/master/pkg/apis/controller/common/v1beta1/common_types.go#L47).

- **algorithm**: The search algorithm that you want Katib to use to find the
  best hyperparameters or neural architecture configuration. Examples include
  random search, grid search, Bayesian optimization, and more.
  See the [search algorithm details](#search-algorithms) below.

- **parallelTrialCount**: The maximum number of parallel trials to run.
  This is equivalent to the number of hyperparameter sets that Katib should train in parallel.

- **maxTrialCount**: The maximum number of trials to run.
  This is equivalent to the number of hyperparameter sets that Katib should
  generate to test the model.

- **maxFailedTrialCount**: The maximum number of failed trials before Katib
  should stop the experiment.
  This is equivalent to the number of failed hyperparameter sets that Katib
  should test.
  If the number of failed trials exceeds `maxFailedTrialCount`, Katib stops the
  experiment with a status of `Failed`.

- **trialTemplate**: The template that defines the trial.

>   You must package your ML training code into a Docker image, as described

Reviewer: To avoid repetition ("you must" x 2)
```suggestion
  You need to package your ML training code into a Docker image, as described
```

  [above](#docker-image). You must configure the model's
  hyperparameters either as command-line arguments or as environment variables,
  so that Katib can automatically set the values in each trial.

  You can use one of the following job types to train your model:

  - [Kubernetes Job](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/jobs-run-to-completion/)
    (does not support distributed execution).
  - [Kubeflow TFJob](/docs/components/training/tftraining/) (supports
    distributed execution).
  - [Kubeflow PyTorchJob](/docs/components/training/pytorch/) (supports
    distributed execution).

  See the [`TrialTemplate`
  type](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/blob/master/pkg/apis/controller/experiments/v1beta1/experiment_types.go#L201-L261).
  The template
  uses the [unstructured format](https://godoc.org/k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/apis/meta/v1/unstructured).

  You can define the job in YAML format or you can use a
  [ConfigMap](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-pod-configmap/).

>   [Here](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/blob/master/manifests/v1beta1/katib-controller/trial-template-configmap.yaml)
>   is an ConfigMap example with trial templates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For trial templates, check [this example of a ConfigMap](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/blob/master/manifests/v1beta1/katib-controller/trial-template-configmap.yaml)
```

Author: I will refactor this section in the following PR with doc for: https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/issues/1341, https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/issues/1280.

- **metricsCollectorSpec**: A specification of how to collect the metrics from
  each trial, such as the accuracy and loss metrics.
  See the [details of the metrics collector](#metrics-collector) below. Default metrics collector is `StdOut`.

- **nasConfig**: The configuration for a neural architecture search (NAS).

>   Note: NAS is currently in **alpha** with limited support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  **Note**: NAS is currently in **alpha** with limited support.
```

[`Suggestion` type](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/blob/master/pkg/apis/controller/suggestions/v1beta1/suggestion_types.go#L117) and
[`Trial` type](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/blob/master/pkg/apis/controller/trials/v1beta1/trial_types.go#L122) is a [custom resource
(CR)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/).
The YAML file that you create for your experiment is the CR specification.

<a id="search-algorithms"></a>

### Search algorithms in detail

Katib currently supports several search algorithms. See the [`AlgorithmSpec`
type](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/blob/master/pkg/apis/controller/common/v1beta1/common_types.go#L23-L33).

Here's a list of the search algorithms available in Katib. The links lead to
descriptions on this page:

- [Grid search](#grid-search)
- [Random search](#random-search)
- [Bayesian optimization](#bayesian)
- [Hyperband](#hyperband)
- [Tree of Parzen Estimators (TPE)](#tpe-search)
- [Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES)](#cmaes)
- [Neural Architecture Search based on ENAS](#enas)

> - [Differentiable Architecture Search (DARTS)](#darts)

Reviewer: Suggestion - we should add this list of available NAS algos to the beginning of the Katib ABOUT page somewhere. Then add "more algorithms are under development."

Author: Sure, I have added: https://github.com/kubeflow/website/blame/b946be02fb367f8e9c2fb5d88a7818ddd7c18ee8/content/en/docs/components/katib/overview.md#L20-L24. WDYT @8bitmp3 ?

  arguments or as environment variables. You have to set the name of your training
  container in `trialTemplate.primaryContainerName`.

  Katib dynamically supports any kind of
  [Kubernetes CRD](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/).
  By default, you can use one of the following job types to train your model:

  - [Kubernetes `Job`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/job/)

  - [Kubeflow `TFJob`](/docs/components/training/tftraining/)

  - [Kubeflow `PyTorchJob`](/docs/components/training/pytorch/)

  - [Kubeflow `MPIJob`](/docs/components/training/mpi)

  - [Tekton `Pipeline`](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline)

>   Refer to the the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Refer to the
```

  [`TrialTemplate` type](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/blob/master/pkg/apis/controller/experiments/v1beta1/experiment_types.go#L208-L270).
  Follow the [trial template guide](/docs/components/katib/trial-template/)
  to understand how to specify `trialTemplate` parameters, save templates in
  `ConfigMaps` and support custom Kubernetes resources in Katib.

- **metricsCollectorSpec**: A specification of how to collect the metrics from
  each trial, such as the accuracy and loss metrics.
  Learn the [details of the metrics collector](#metrics-collector) below.

>   Default metrics collector is `StdOut`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The default metrics collector is `StdOut`.
```

- **nasConfig**: The configuration for a neural architecture search (NAS).
  **Note**: NAS is currently in **alpha** with limited support.
  You can specify the configurations of the neural network design that you want
  to optimize, including the number of layers in the network, the types of
  operations, and more.
  Refer to the
  [`NasConfig` type](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/blob/master/pkg/apis/controller/experiments/v1beta1/experiment_types.go#L296).

  - **graphConfig**: The graph config that defines structure for a
    directed acyclic graph of the neural network. You can specify the number of layers,
    `input_sizes` for the input layer and `output_sizes` for the output layer.
    Refer to the
    [`GraphConfig` type](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/blob/master/pkg/apis/controller/experiments/v1beta1/experiment_types.go#L301-L306).

  - **operations**: The range of operations that you want to tune for your ML model.

>     For each neural network layer the NAS algorithm selects one of the operations

Reviewer: Please double check that NAS has been defined in the beginning of the guide somewhere ("neural architecture search (NAS)") 👍

    to build a neural network. Each operation contains sets of **parameters** which
    are described above.
    Refer to the
    [`Operation` type](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/blob/master/pkg/apis/controller/experiments/v1beta1/experiment_types.go#L308-L312).

    You can find all NAS examples [here](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/tree/master/examples/v1beta1/nas).

- **resumePolicy**: Experiment resume policy. If the experiment was successful
  because `maxTrialCount` was reached, you can resume it by increasing
  `maxTrialCount`. Specify `resumePolicy: LongRunning`, if you want to use this
  feature. If you don't need to resume the experiment, specify

>   `resumePolicy: Never`. In that case, suggestion resources will be deleted and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `resumePolicy: Never` — in this case, suggestion resources will be deleted and
```

- [Random search](#random-search)
- [Bayesian optimization](#bayesian)
- [Hyperband](#hyperband)
- [Tree of Parzen Estimators (TPE)](#tpe-search)
- [Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES)](#cmaes)
- [Neural Architecture Search based on ENAS](#enas)
- [Differentiable Architecture Search (DARTS)](#darts)

More algorithms are under development. You can add an algorithm to Katib
yourself. Check the guide to
[adding a new algorithm](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/blob/master/docs/new-algorithm-service.md)
and the
[developer guide](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/blob/master/docs/developer-guide.md).

<a id="grid-search"></a>

#### Grid search

The algorithm name in Katib is `grid`.

Grid sampling is useful when all variables are discrete (as opposed to
continuous) and the number of possibilities is low. A grid search
performs an exhaustive combinatorial search over all possibilities,
making the search process extremely long even for medium sized problems.

Katib uses the [Chocolate](https://chocolate.readthedocs.io) optimization
framework for its grid search.

<a id="random-search"></a>

#### Random search

The algorithm name in Katib is `random`.

> Random sampling is an alternative to grid search, useful when the number of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Random sampling is an alternative to grid search and is used when the number of
```

</div>

<a id="bayesian"></a>

#### Bayesian optimization

The algorithm name in Katib is `bayesianoptimization`.

The [Bayesian optimization](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1012.2599.pdf) method uses

> gaussian process regression to model the search space. This technique calculates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gaussian process regression to model the search space. This technique calculates
```

</div>

<a id="enas"></a>

#### Neural Architecture Search based on ENAS

{{% alert title="Alpha version" color="warning" %}}

> Neural architecture search is currently in <b>alpha</b> with limited support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Neural architecture search (NAS) is currently in <b>alpha</b> with limited support.
```

although it must've been predefined but just in case

Author: Defined here: https://github.com/kubeflow/website/blame/760ec66a6a2327d0b9ae814fa7695dbbb3d537a5/content/en/docs/components/katib/experiment.md#L10.

The Kubeflow team is interested in any feedback you may have, in particular with
regards to usability of the feature. You can log issues and comments in
the [Katib issue tracker](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/issues).
{{% /alert %}}

> The algorithm name in Katib is `enas`.

Reviewer: Maybe move this sentence up so it appears after the section headline (subheading), like in other algorithm descriptions?

```suggestion
The algorithm name in Katib is `enas`.
```

  </table>
</div>

For more information, check:

- Documentation in the Katib repository on the
  [Efficient Neural Architecture Search](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/tree/master/pkg/suggestion/v1beta1/nas/enas).

> - As an ENAS example, see the YAML file for the
>   [enas-example-gpu](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/blob/master/examples/v1beta1/nas/enas-example-gpu.yaml).
>   The example aims to show all the possible operations. Due to the large search
>   space, the example is not likely to generate a good result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For an ENAS example, check the YAML file — 
  [`enas-example-gpu.yaml`](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/blob/master/examples/v1beta1/nas/enas-example-gpu.yaml) —
  which attempts to show all possible operations. Due to the large search
  space, the example is not likely to generate a good result.
```

        <td>stem_multiplier</td>
        <td>int</td>
        <td>3</td>
        <td>Multiplier for initial channels. It is used in the first stem cell.</td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</div>

For more information, check:

- Documentation in the Katib repository on the
  [Differentiable Architecture Search](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/tree/master/pkg/suggestion/v1beta1/nas/darts).

> - As a DARTS example, check the YAML file for the
>   [darts-example-gpu](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/blob/master/examples/v1beta1/nas/darts-example-gpu.yaml).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The DARTS example — 
  [`darts-example-gpu.yaml`](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/blob/master/examples/v1beta1/nas/darts-example-gpu.yaml).
```

<a id="metrics-collector"></a>

### Metrics collector

In the `metricsCollectorSpec` section of the YAML configuration file, you can
define how Katib should collect the metrics from each trial, such as the
accuracy and loss metrics.
Refer to the
[`MetricsCollectorSpec` type](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/blob/master/pkg/apis/controller/common/v1beta1/common_types.go#L155-L225)

Your training code can record the metrics into `stdout` or into arbitrary output
files. Katib collects the metrics using a _sidecar_ container. A sidecar is

> a utility container that supports the main container in the Kubernetes Pod.

Reviewer: Check if a K8s "pod" is capitalized

Author: I think so: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/

To define the metrics collector for your experiment:

1. Specify the collector type in the `.collector.kind` field.
   Katib's metrics collector supports the following collector types:

   - `StdOut`: Katib collects the metrics from the operating system's default
     output location (_standard output_). This is the default metrics collector.

   - `File`: Katib collects the metrics from an arbitrary file, which
     you specify in the `.source.fileSystemPath.path` field. Training container should log metrics to this file.
     Check the
     [file metrics collector example](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/blob/master/examples/v1beta1/file-metricscollector-example.yaml#L15-L22).

>      Default file path is `/var/log/katib/metrics.log`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     The default file path is `/var/log/katib/metrics.log`.
```

   - `TensorFlowEvent`: Katib collects the metrics from a directory path
     containing a [tf.Event](https://www.tensorflow.org/api_docs/python/tf/compat/v1/Event).
     You should specify the path in the `.source.fileSystemPath.path` field.
     Check the
     [TFJob example](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/blob/master/examples/v1beta1/tfjob-example.yaml#L16-L22).

>      Default directory path is `/var/log/katib/tfevent/`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     The default directory path is `/var/log/katib/tfevent/`.
```

         class="mt-3 mb-3 border border-info rounded">

View the results of the experiment in the Katib UI:

1. Open the Katib menu panel on the left, then open the **HP** section and
   click **Monitor**:

   <img src="/docs/images/katib/katib-menu.png"
       alt="The Katib menu panel"
       class="mt-3 mb-3 border border-info rounded">

1. You should see the list of experiments:

   <img src="/docs/images/katib/katib-experiments.png"
     alt="The random example in the list of Katib experiments"
     class="mt-3 mb-3 border border-info rounded">

1. Click the name of your experiment. For example, click **random-example**.
1. You should see a graph showing the level of validation and train accuracy for various
   combinations of the hyperparameter values. For example, the graph below
   shows learning rate, number of layers, and optimizer:

   <img src="/docs/images/katib/katib-random-example-graph.png"
       alt="Graph produced by the random example"
       class="mt-3 mb-3 border border-info rounded">

1. Below the graph is a list of trials that ran within the experiment.
   Click a trial name to see the trial data.

## Next steps

> - See how to run the random algorithm and other [Katib
>   examples](/docs/components/katib/hyperparameter/#random-algorithm)
>   in the getting-started guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Learn how to run the [random algorithm and other Katib
  examples](/docs/components/katib/hyperparameter/#random-algorithm).
```

- For an overview of the concepts involved in hyperparameter tuning and
  neural architecture search, read the [introduction to
  Katib](/docs/components/katib/overview/).

> - For a detailed instruction of the Katib Configuration file,
>   read the [Katib config page](/docs/components/katib/katib-config/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Read about [Katib Configuration (Katib config)](/docs/components/katib/katib-config/).
```

> - See how you can change installation of Katib component in the [environment variables guide](/docs/components/katib/env-variables/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [How to set up environment variables](/docs/components/katib/env-variables/) for each Katib component.
```

You can use [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/overview/)
to launch an experiment from the command line:

```shell
kubectl apply -f <your-path/your-experiment-config.yaml>
```

> **Note:** If you deployed Katib as part of Kubeflow, you need to

Reviewer: To make it clear here:

```suggestion
**Note:** If you deployed Katib as part of Kubeflow (your Kubeflow deployment should include Katib), you need to
```
